# Privacy-Guide

WARNING: THIS ARTICLE IS ONLY FOR WHO REALLY WANT THEIR DATA PRIVATE AND CARE ABOUT YOUR OWN PRIVACY ON THE INTERNET  
If you want to protect your privacy (or less data mining from big tech company) then you are welcome to this article. But if you don't care, considering close this page and keep your data being collected to them.  
We all know nowadays, technology is growing faster and it had became an important to our daily uses. But these days, with the fast growing of technology, more and more data being collected by companies to improve your experience.  
Some say this is good, some say this is bad. Both are true but if you scared and don't really like your data being collected, considering stop using it or you can do a little tweaks to optimise your data collection.  
In this article, I will talk about what should you do and what you should not do and also keep your data private and more secure on the internet.  

## 1.Operating System  
ALWAYS keep away from proprietary Operating System such as macOS or Windows. Your operating system is also a spyware that send data to them. Back in the days, both are still good and I must say at that time people felt very safe to use those kind of Operating Systems. But since the release of Windows 10, things got spookier and also macOS as well. If you want your data secure and private, keep away from it. So if you had kept away those OSes, what should you use ? The standard gold for privacy is an OpenSource Operating System is GNU/Linux. Was created by Linus Torvalds and it keeps growing in the future thanks to all big tech companies. So why GNU/Linux? Basically, you can do what ever you want. Because GNU/Linux is open source and you don't really need to care about your data is being collected. It's your Operating System, you can do whatever you want as long as it suitable for you. You can do anything without some sort of strict policies like Microsoft or Apple. There are many GNU/Linux distros out there are waiting for you to try. You can choose whatever you want as long as it can do anything that you wanted. So what about games and apps runiing on Windows? For games, you don't really need to worry. If that game does not support your GNU/Linux, considering dual boot with Windows and play on it. As long as you are feeling ok with it. Also, Linux Gaming is growing and thanks to the release of Steam Deck, Linux Gaming is now a good thing to try (some are better than Windows). Apps like Adobe, Microsoft Office,... you can but you should research it for yourself (Office has a web). If you don't want to use GNU/Linux, then it's fine, you can still use Windows but I would recommend you to use some Privacy Script to get a little strict of your data as possible. So that is all for Operating System.   

## 2.Mail Service  
Don't use Gmail by Google or Outlook by Microsoft, they are both big tech companies and they know your mail and you feel uncomfortable with it. If you want a private mail, just pay a price for it. My recommendations are ProtonMail or TutanotaMail, both got encrypted and both in the EU (EU got GDPR) so you don't need to worry about your mail being read by
them, as long as you know what are you doing. You could get a free plan, but if you want more storage, just grab money and buy a plan, as long as you feel comfortable with your mail service. Another thing is that you can host your own mail by using your own domain, just buy a VPS, do something on it then you got your own private mail with your own server.  

## 3.VPN  
DON'T YOU EVER TRUST VPN ADS. VPNS ARE MEANT TO BE PRIVATE AND SECURE. Keep away from NordVPN or VPNs that are advertising. A VPN (Virtual Private Network) keeps your connection secure and encrypted, which is partially true for some points This is very usefull when it comes with Public Wifi, If you connected to a public Wifi without a VPN, hackers might know your credentials like Bank Account, your social media accounts,... It's very danager. If you connected to a VPN, Hackers only see that you are requesting the VPN service only and your data is secure. Another thing is that "No Log Policy". For this, We can't confirm that that VPN don't keep logs or not. Because we can't see the proof where is " No Log Policy". So this is the spooky thing about a VPN, for example like HMA VPN got caught because go backward with their "No Log Policy" and no one will ever trust HMA VPN again. So what VPN should you use? The most secure, private and cheap VPN is MullvadVPN. MullvadVPN don't really need your mail, passwords, phone numbers,... The only thing you
need is to remember your account number. And that is the most private way to use a VPN. MullvadVPN also fast depends on your location. Another VPN that is ProtonVPN. It requires credentials but if you feel ok with it, just use it. From my experience, MullvadVPN and ProtonVPN are the most secure VPN I've ever used. If you don't trust them, buy a VPS and setup your own VPN connection, that is private for you.  

## 4. Mobile Devices
Keep away from iPhone and OEMs's Android as possible. For Android it is more convinient when it comes with privacy. You can use a custom ROM on Android. But if you want more secure. Don't use Google, use pure Android. If you want your phone secure and private, just De-google it and don't use any Gapps. But if you still some Gapps, then use microG with a minimal privacy. For ROMs, I would recommend using LineageOS, /e/ Foundation ROMs or some Vanilla AOSP builds without Gapps.  

## 5.Browsers
Don't use proprietary Browsers like Safari, Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge,... If you want a minimal privacy then use FireFox, you are already safe enough to dodge your data being collected. If you want more private, use LibreWolf, ungoogled-chromium,Tor,... Which are the most secure and private browsers that you should really use.  

## 6.Search Engine
I know Google is the most popular search engine in the world but it's by Google and you know what that means. Don't use Bing, Google,... They just grab any queries that you searched and send back to their server. Some alternatives like DuckDuckGo, SwissCow, Brave Search,... They are private search engines and don't track your search activities.   
